File: ISO_26262-6_746747_EN
Chapter: 5General topics for the product development at the software level
Page: 12
Content:


            ## 5 General topics for the product development at the software level


            ### 5.1 Objectives

            The objectives of this clause are:
            a) to ensure a suitable and consistent software development process; and
            b) to ensure a suitable software development environment.

            ### 5.2 General

            The reference phase model for the development of software is given in Figure 2 . Details concerning the
            treatment of configurable software are provided in Annex C .
            NOTE Within the figure, the specific clauses of each part of the ISO 26262 series of standards are indicated
            in the following manner: “m - n”, where “m” represents the number of the part and “n” indicates the number of the
            clause, e.g. “4-7” represents ISO 26262-4:2018, Clause 7.

                     **Figure 2 — Reference phase model for the product development at the software level**


            **4 ©  – **

                       NOTE 1 Development approaches or methods from agile software development can also be suitable for the
                       development of safety-related software, but if the safety activities are tailored in this manner, ISO 26262-2:2018
                       6.4.5 is considered. However, agile approaches and methods cannot be used to omit safety measures or ignore
                       the fundamental documentation, process or safety integrity of product rigour required for the achievement of
                       functional safety.
                       EXAMPLE 1 Test Driven Development can be used to improve quality and testability of requirements.
                       EXAMPLE 2 Continuous integration based on an automated build system can support consistency of sub-
                       phases and facilitate regression tests. Such a build system typically performs code generation, compiling and
                       linking, static code analysis, documentation generation, testing and packaging. It allows, subject to tool chain
                       and tool configuration, repeatable and, after changes, comparable production of software, documentation and
                       test results.
                       NOTE 2 Cybersecurity can also be considered when developing the embedded software of a particular item,
                       see ISO 26262-2:2018, 5.4.2.3. In order to be able to develop software, specific topics are addressed in this clause
                       concerning the modelling, design and/or programming languages to be used, and the application of guidelines
                       and tools.
                       NOTE 3 Tools used for software development can include tools other than software tools.
                       EXAMPLE 3 Tools used for testing phases.

                       ### 5.3 Inputs to this clause


                       **5.3.1 Prerequisites**

                       The following information shall be available:
                       — (none)

                       **5.3.2 Further supporting information**

                       The following information can be considered:
                       — qualified software tools available (see ISO 26262-8:2018, Clause 11);
                       — design and coding guidelines for modelling, design and programming languages (from an external
                              source);
                       — guidelines for the application of methods (from an external source); and
                       — guidelines for the application of tools (from an external source).

                       ### 5.4 Requirements and recommendations


                       **5.4.1 When developing the software of an item, software development processes and software**

                       development environments shall be used which:
                       a) are suitable for developing safety-related embedded software, including methods, guidelines,
                              languages and tools;
                       b) support consistency across the sub-phases of the software development lifecycle and the respective
                              work products; and
                       c) are compatible with the system and hardware development phases regarding required interaction
                              and consistency of exchange of information.
                       NOTE 1 The sequencing of phases, tasks and activities, including iteration steps, for the software of an item
                       intends to ensure the consistency of the corresponding work products with the product development at the
                       hardware level (see ISO 26262-5) and the product development at the system level (see ISO 26262-4).
                       ©  –  5
            NOTE 2 The software tool criteria evaluation report (see ISO 26262-8:2018, 11.5.1) or the software tool
            qualification report (see ISO 26262-8:2018, 11.5.2) can provide input to the tool usage.

            **5.4.2 The criteria that shall be considered when selecting a design, modelling or programming**

            language are:
            a) an unambiguous and comprehensible definition;
                  EXAMPLE Unambiguous definition of syntax and semantics or restriction to configuration of the
                  development environment.
            b) suitability for specifying and managing safety requirements according to ISO 26262-8:2018
                  Clause 6, if modelling is used for requirements engineering and management;
            c) support the achievement of modularity, abstraction and encapsulation; and
            d) support the use of structured constructs.
            NOTE Assembly languages can be used for those parts of the software where the use of high-level
            programming languages is not appropriate, such as low-level software with interfaces to the hardware, interrupt
            handlers, or time-critical algorithms. However using assembly languages can require a suitable application or
            tailoring of all software development phases (e.g. requirements of Clause 8 ).

            **5.4.3 Criteria for suitable modelling, design or programming languages (see 5.4.2 ) that are not**

            sufficiently addressed by the language itself shall be covered by the corresponding guidelines, or by the
            development environment, considering the topics listed in Table 1 .
            EXAMPLE 1 MISRA C (see Reference [ 3 ]) is a coding guideline for the programming language C and includes
            guidance for automatically generated code.
            EXAMPLE 2 In the case of model based development with automatic code generation, guidelines can be applied
            at the model level as well as the code level. Appropriate modelling style guides including the MISRA AC series can
            be considered. Style guides for commercial tools are also possible guidelines.
            NOTE Existing coding guidelines and modelling guidelines can be modified for a specific item development.

            **6 ©  – **


                                                **Table 1 — Topics to be covered by modelling and coding guidelines**


                                                                                                                                                                 **ASIL**


                                                                              **Topics**


                                                                                                                                                   **A B C D**

                        1a Enforcement of low complexity a ++ ++ ++ ++
                        1b Use of language subsets b ++ ++ ++ ++
                        1c Enforcement of strong typing c ++ ++ ++ ++
                        1d Use of defensive implementation techniques d + + ++ ++
                        1e Use of well-trusted design principles e + + ++ ++
                        1f Use of unambiguous graphical representation + ++ ++ ++
                        1g Use of style guides + ++ ++ ++
                        1h Use of naming conventions ++ ++ ++ ++
                        1i Concurrency aspects f + + + +
                        a An appropriate compromise of this topic with other requirements of this document may be required.
                        b The objectives of topic 1b include:
                        — Exclusion of ambiguously-defined language constructs which may be interpreted differently by different modellers,
                        programmers, code generators or compilers.
                        — Exclusion of language constructs which from experience easily lead to mistakes, for example assignments in
                        conditions or identical naming of local and global variables.
                        — Exclusion of language constructs which could result in unhandled run-time errors.
                        c The objective of topic 1c is to impose principles of strong typing where these are not inherent in the language.
                        d Examples of defensive implementation techniques:
                        — Verify the divisor before a division operation (different from zero or in a specific range).
                        — Check an identifier passed by parameter to verify that the calling function is the intended caller.
                        — Use the “default” in switch cases to detect an error.
                        e Verification of the validity of the underlying assumptions, boundaries and conditions of application may be required.
                        f Concurrency of processes or tasks is not limited to executing software in a multi-core or multi-processor runtime
                        environment.

                       ### 5.5 Work products


                       **5.5.1 Documentation of the software development environment resulting from requirements 5.4.1**

                       to 5.4.3 and C.4.1 to C.4.11 .